Lev Manovich, 2016-07-26

People who still use the phrase “late capitalism” from 1980s (and what comes after? Communism?) are really not in touch with the world today. People all around us have meaningful existence, fall in love, create great things, make children, work, get sad, get happy – and enjoy very much social media. They are not alienated. And they were never were even in the 19th century – how would Marx who refused to ever visit a real factory in his lifetime would know that? Look around your. People feel proud of the work they do, they build relations with co-workers, the work gives them meaning,  and then they are finally “free” (retirement), only when their lives often feel no longer meaningful.

And only people with no sense of history think the world is in “deep crisis” today. It only takes a little bit, people all start saying it, and next week then forget. More in crisis than in 1949? Or 1914? Or any time not such long time ago when populations of whole countries periodically died because of plague. Or worse than any time before 1919 when most children died young and a woman was used as factory to make enough babies for at least one to survive. Or when Mao killed hundreds of millions, and Stalin dozens of millions (all in the name of “new society” that will improve on capitalism)?

Our societies have great science and technologies. But our intellectual framework to understand the society are not advanced at all in comparison. Between trying to fit really into Marxist straight jacket and advancing 19th c. “Social physics” using big data, we are at best only 1895 – just with faster calculators (press calls this “AI.”)

People who spend their lives in one place and are not really exposed to other places, contexts, experiences and histories tend t think that their place is either the best (because they managed to build decent lives even though it was very hard) – or the worst (because they grew in privilege and take it for granted.) That’s why millions of people who come to America to build better lives like it and are very satisfied – because they can compare it with how it back home. And thats why most “intellectuals” and “artists” always complain about “capitalism” – because they are mostly white, and come from middle class or rich families, and take for granted what “late capitalism” offers.  

Thats also why I almost never see immigrants in the U.S. going for PhDs in humanities. They came to U.S. to create a better life, not to get a PhD in “complaining” about what America has (and what other countries may not but trying to achieve.)

P.S. After seeing discussion provoked by this post (that was my idea), I need to add one point. Over last 200 years, people thinking of how to improve capitalsim, or come with alternatives) generated lots of great ideas. Just look at 1960s. 1960s movements, “hippy” etc generated all important ideas that drive the world 60 years later. And today, people create new great ideas because they don't like some aspects of capitalism (e.g, “open source.”) Note that I did not say that I support every feature of capitalism, I only objected to the use of “late capitalism” in uncritical way.

P.P.S.
Also, note that socialists in 19th and 20th century worked hard to make capitalsim more human. They win – eventually we got 8 hr working day, and only 5 working days a week. And in the case of Nordic countries, we now have the best versions of capitalism – societies with highest level of trust between people, security, and reported highest levels of satisfaction. So if more countries can achieve similar situation, the world certainly will be better.

P.P.P.S.
“Communist” countries were based on millions of innocent people working for free in labor camps, and everybody else not having basic freedoms. So in comparison, capitalism is indeed a better system.

https://www.facebook.com/lev.manovich/posts/10155204323482316